Add section on "Shared Consent in Brokered Authorization" (#50)
SECtim/draft-wuertele-oauth-security-topics-update: draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics-update.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The client MUST NOT share OAuth providers with completed client registrations across toolkits and tenants belonging to different owners.

I think we can safely remove this sentence with the new "shared consent" section being added.
Previously this was (very) briefly alluded to in the draft under the COAT defense, which was admittedly hand-wavy and did not really describe the attack steps.
The new section (this PR) already provides a separate, self-contained description.

Author: Agree, fixed in 17a5450b6c26071c183a91f64850499600c59eac.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Daniel Fett,
Louis Jannett,
```

😉

    target: https://www.blackhat.com/us-25/briefings/schedule/index.html#back-to-the-future-hacking-and-securing-connection-based-oauth-architectures-in-agentic-ai-and-integration-platforms-44686
    refcontent: "Black Hat USA 2025"
    title: "Back to the Future: Hacking and Securing Connection-based OAuth Architectures in Agentic AI and Integration Platforms"
  research.rub:
    author:
    - ins: T. Innocenti
      name: Tommaso Innocenti
    - ins: L. Jannett
      name: Louis Jannett
    - ins: C. Mainka
      name: Christian Mainka
    - ins: V. Mladenov
      name: Vladislav Mladenov
    - ins: E. Kirda
      name: Engin Kirda
    date: 2025

>     target: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11023371

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    date: May 2025
    target: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/11023371
```
does not really matter.

  * an implementation change to co-locate the redirection endpoint under the same origin as the endpoint maintaining the user session, and/or to re-authenticate the user at the redirection endpoint from the external user agent (e.g., a browser), or
  * from the current redirection endpoint, performing a further redirection back to the starting origin and/or user agent where the existing session is available. For native apps, the redirect options specified in {{Section 7 of !RFC8252}} MUST be used. The location of this further redirection MUST NOT be controllable by an attacker, or it will result in Open Redirection ({{Section 4.11 of !RFC9700}}).

## Shared Consent in Brokered OAuth {#SharedConsent}

In a brokered OAuth deployment, an intermediate entity (called the *broker* in the following) mediates between downstream clients and one or more upstream authorization servers (referred to as *AS* in the following).
The broker acts as an OAuth client towards each AS.

> Towards its downstream clients, the broker either acts as an authorization server itself, exposing a standards-compliant OAuth interface, or it exposes a custom, non-OAuth interface, as commonly found in multi-tenant OAuth-as-a-Service offerings (also known as Token Vaults, see {{COAT}}).

Author: ```suggestion
Towards its downstream clients, the broker acts as an authorization server.
```

  * an implementation change to co-locate the redirection endpoint under the same origin as the endpoint maintaining the user session, and/or to re-authenticate the user at the redirection endpoint from the external user agent (e.g., a browser), or
  * from the current redirection endpoint, performing a further redirection back to the starting origin and/or user agent where the existing session is available. For native apps, the redirect options specified in {{Section 7 of !RFC8252}} MUST be used. The location of this further redirection MUST NOT be controllable by an attacker, or it will result in Open Redirection ({{Section 4.11 of !RFC9700}}).

## Shared Consent in Brokered OAuth {#SharedConsent}

In a brokered OAuth deployment, an intermediate entity (called the *broker* in the following) mediates between downstream clients and one or more upstream authorization servers (referred to as *AS* in the following).
The broker acts as an OAuth client towards each AS.

> Towards its downstream clients, the broker either acts as an authorization server itself, exposing a standards-compliant OAuth interface, or it exposes a custom, non-OAuth interface, as commonly found in multi-tenant OAuth-as-a-Service offerings (also known as Token Vaults, see {{COAT}}).

Reviewer: > ... as commonly found in multi-tenant OAuth-as-a-Service offerings (also known as Token Vaults, see {{COAT}}).

Readers may wonder about the difference between a Broker and OAuth-as-a-Service, since OAuth-as-a-Service first appears in another subsection and is not rigorously defined (but introduced only as an example use case/deployment scenario).

I guess we can keep it as is for now, but later on, we may want to:

* make each subsection in this draft self-contained (with limited or no cross-reference)
* add separate paragraphs for common use cases and new terminology used in the draft (ref: Section 2.2 and Appendix A of https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant/)
* better clarify the relationship among the security issues discussed in this draft, with a narrowly-scoped draft title and some overarching framing paragraphs

Tracked at issue https://github.com/SECtim/draft-wuertele-oauth-security-topics-update/issues/55

Reviewer: In the "Attack Description" down below, to raise awareness, do you want to briefly mention that the problem can also apply to authentication when OpenID Connect is used?
(Alternatively, in the introductory paragraphs where you first define a Broker, we could note that a Broker may broker either authorization or authentication, depending on the use case.)

I was thinking from the perspective that, Brokering Authentication / SSO-as-a-Service can be seen as a counterpart to Token Vaults / OAuth-as-a-Service in the authorization world, and vice versa. 
-> of course this is a bit **deployment-specific** and may not warrant being included in the spec in such detail, or should belong to the "use cases paragraph".

Author: > > ... as commonly found in multi-tenant OAuth-as-a-Service offerings (also known as Token Vaults, see {{COAT}}).
> 
> Readers may wonder about the difference between a Broker and OAuth-as-a-Service, since OAuth-as-a-Service first appears in another subsection and is not rigorously defined (but introduced only as an example use case/deployment scenario).
> 
> I guess we can keep it as is for now, but later on, we may want to:
> 
> * make each subsection in this draft self-contained (with limited or no cross-reference)
> * add separate paragraphs for common use cases and new terminology used in the draft (ref: Section 2.2 and Appendix A of https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-identity-assertion-authz-grant/)
> * better clarify the relationship among the security issues discussed in this draft, with a narrowly-scoped draft title and some overarching framing paragraphs
> 
> Tracked at issue [#55](https://github.com/SECtim/draft-wuertele-oauth-security-topics-update/issues/55)

Thinking about it, do we even need to include it? It feels somewhat awkward to tell developers that using a custom non-OAuth interface in an OAuth RFC is okay. Basically, the broker is just an AS for the downstream client, so we should not care about what happens there at all. See my suggestion below, which reduces complexity.

> In the "Attack Description" down below, to raise awareness, do you want to briefly mention that the problem can also apply to authentication when OpenID Connect is used? (Alternatively, in the introductory paragraphs where you first define a Broker, we could note that a Broker may broker either authorization or authentication, depending on the use case.)
> 
> I was thinking from the perspective that, Brokering Authentication / SSO-as-a-Service can be seen as a counterpart to Token Vaults / OAuth-as-a-Service in the authorization world, and vice versa. -> of course this is a bit **deployment-specific** and may not warrant being included in the spec in such detail, or should belong to the "use cases paragraph".

Since OAuth is part of OpenID Connect, all attacks in this draft should work equally in OIDC, while some attacks may only work in OIDC. RFC 9700 also refers to OIDC only when attacks apply exclusively to OIDC. Therefore, I would not explicitly mention OIDC here.

Reviewer: I agree with you.

It’s just that the main goal of some Token Vaults is to offload OAuth (client) responsibilities from downstream clients. They function either like a Backend-for-Frontend (managing OAuth flows and relaying downstream clients’ API calls, without exposing raw tokens to them), or like a Token-Mediating Backend (managing OAuth flows but still returning raw tokens to downstream clients). In the former case, it is not so obvious that the Broker/Token Vault is acting as an AS, whether OAuth-compliant or not.

So as a middle ground, what about
```suggestion
Towards its downstream clients, the broker either acts as an authorization server itself, exposing a standards-compliant OAuth interface, or it exposes a custom, non-OAuth interface.
```

The attack and countermeasures described in this section apply regardless of which of these two interfaces the broker exposes to its downstream clients.

Throughout this section, the terms *upstream* and *downstream* are used relative to the broker and the direction in which authorization flows.
The AS is *upstream* as the source of authorization and tokens, while the clients the broker serves are *downstream* as the recipients of the access the broker obtains on their behalf.

The term *downstream client* furthermore denotes a unit of trust rather than necessarily a single application or an OAuth client in the sense of {{!RFC6749}}.

> Multiple applications belonging to the same owner, such as the toolkits of a single tenant of a multi-tenant broker or the applications of an organization operating its own broker, may legitimately share a single registration and consent decision and thus be treated as a single downstream client.

Reviewer: * toolkits -> applications.
* I felt like the term "owner" is a bit ambiguous (I understand that we used it in the first place). For example, it could be mistaken as "resource owner". Some replacement wordings below:
```suggestion
Multiple applications within the same administrative boundary, such as the applications of a single tenant of a multi-tenant broker or the applications of an organization operating its own broker, may legitimately share a single registration and consent decision and thus be treated as a single downstream client.
```

or

```suggestion
Multiple applications under common administrative control, such as the applications of a single tenant of a multi-tenant broker or the applications of an organization operating its own broker, may legitimately share a single registration and consent decision and thus be treated as a single downstream client.
```
Feel free to keep it as is or propose alternatives.

> Applications belonging to different owners constitute distinct downstream clients.

Reviewer: Same as [above](https://github.com/SECtim/draft-wuertele-oauth-security-topics-update/pull/50#discussion_r3418072421). e.g.,
```suggestion
Applications under separate administrative control constitute distinct downstream clients.
```

When the broker registers itself once at an AS and reuses this single registration for every downstream client it serves, the AS cannot distinguish between those downstream clients.
As a consequence, the consent the user grants for one downstream client is silently reused for any other downstream client that integrates the same broker.
A malicious downstream client integrated with the same broker can therefore obtain access to the user's protected resources without the user ever consenting to that client.

### Attack Description {#SharedConsentDescription}

The descriptions here follow {{research.rub}}, where additional details of the attack are laid out.

> Shared consent attacks require at least two downstream clients (one honest, one malicious) to be integrated with the same broker, and that broker to register itself as a single client at the AS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Shared consent attacks require at least two downstream clients (one honest, one malicious) to be integrated with the same (honest) broker, and that broker to register itself as a single client at the (honest) upstream AS.
```

... to make the setting aboundandly clear.

    |             |             |             |---------------------->|
    |             |          consent: cid_B@AS|                       |
    |<--------------------------------------------------------------->|
    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |         authz res         |                       |
    |             |<--------------------------|                       |
    |             |             |             |                       |
    |             |           authz req: cid_MC@B                     |
    |             |             |------------>|                       |
    |             |             |             |  authz req: cid_B@AS  |
    |             |             |             |---------------------->|
    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |             |  authz res  |                       |
    |             |             |<------------|                       |
~~~

> In the second phase of the figure, no consent prompt is rendered for `M-Client`.

Reviewer: > In the second phase of the figure

nitpick: is there a need to label "phase 1" & "phase 2" in the (ASCII) figure?
The phase distinction is already quite obvious now, so just a minor nit.

Author: Fixed in 6bfa3e5937c66d9c9ec00e1c0ef608db707794ba

> The AS only sees the broker's client identifier `cid_B@AS`, for which the user has already granted consent in the first phase, so the AS silently issues a token to `B` (cf. the `prompt` parameter with the `none` value defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of {{OpenID.Core}}) and `B` returns an `authz res` to `M-Client`.

Reviewer: what about
```suggestion
The AS only sees the broker's client identifier `cid_B@AS`, for which the user has already granted consent in the first phase, so the AS silently issues a token to `B` (cf. the `prompt` parameter with value `none`, as defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of {{OpenID.Core}}) and `B` returns an `authz res` to `M-Client`.
```
or
```suggestion
The AS only sees the broker's client identifier `cid_B@AS`, for which the user has already granted consent in the first phase, so the AS silently issues a token to `B` (cf. `prompt=none`, as defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of {{OpenID.Core}}) and `B` returns an `authz res` to `M-Client`.
```

Brokers MUST employ at least one of the following two countermeasures.

#### Per-Client Registration at the Upstream Authorization Server {#SharedConsentRegistration}

Each downstream client MUST be registered as a separate client at the AS.
When initiating an authorization flow to the AS on behalf of a downstream client, the broker MUST use the registration of exactly that downstream client.

The specific mechanism by which these per-client registrations are established is out of scope of this document.
In practice, they are commonly established as follows:
The broker provides each downstream client with a redirection URI that is hosted by the broker, and instructs the downstream client to register at every AS it expects to use, using the broker-provided redirection URI.
The downstream client performs this registration at each AS, obtaining a distinct client identifier (e.g., `cid_HC@AS` for `H-Client` and `cid_MC@AS` for `M-Client`) and any associated credentials (such as a client secret).
The downstream client then hands these credentials over to the broker, which gives the broker full control to act on behalf of the downstream client at the AS.

> Alternatively, the broker can register each downstream client at the AS itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
For simplicity, I'm okay to drop this sentence. Up to you :)

    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |         authz res         |                       |
    |             |<--------------------------|                       |
    |             |             |             |                       |
    |             |           authz req: cid_MC@B                     |
    |             |             |------------>|                       |
    |             |             |             | authz req: cid_MC@AS  |
    |             |             |             |---------------------->|
    |             |         consent: cid_MC@AS|                       |
    |<--------------------------------------------------------------->|
    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |             |  authz res  |                       |
    |             |             |<------------|                       |
~~~

#### Broker-Side Consent Screen {#SharedConsentBrokerConsent}

> The broker MUST present an explicit consent screen to the user that identifies the downstream client, before initiating its own authorization request to the AS on behalf of the downstream client.

Reviewer: > **before** initiating its own authorization request to the AS on behalf of the downstream client.

Could it be **after** the authorization response? Are they equally secure?

Author: Technically, it could be, but at that point, the AS would already have issued tokens for a flow that has not yet received consent. The broker could suppress the tokens if no consent is granted afterwards. But my intuition is that tokens should only be issued for fully consented flows, as in normal OAuth.

> The broker MUST present an explicit consent screen to the user that identifies the downstream client, before initiating its own authorization request to the AS on behalf of the downstream client.

Reviewer: > The broker MUST present an explicit consent screen

Is the MUST contradictory to the MAY below?
> The broker MAY remember the user's consent decision

This MAY looks like an exception to the MUST, but AFAIK a MUST should be an absolute requirement ([RFC2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119#section-1)) without any exceptions.

What's your take?

Reviewer: FYI, we have something like 
> Clients that interact with more than one authorization server and
   authenticate with signature-based client authentication methods **MUST**
   employ one of the following countermeasures, **unless audience
   injection attacks are mitigated by other means**, such as using fresh
   key material for each authorization server.

and

> **Unless otherwise specified as follows**, the client **MUST** issue per-
   context distinct redirection URI that incorporates this unique
   connection context identifier.

in previous sections to avoid this kind of contradictions while still allowing for some exceptions.

Author: Good point, fixed it similar to your second example in 6dc103ced2524e95d23780dbb9a3271648b6c711

The broker MUST NOT skip this consent screen based on a previously granted consent for a different downstream client.
The broker MAY remember the user's consent decision per downstream client (e.g., per `client_id` of the downstream client), but MUST NOT remember it across different downstream clients.

> This countermeasure prevents the broker from silently reusing a consent granted for one downstream client when initiating a request to the AS on behalf of another, even when the AS cannot distinguish between the broker's downstream clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This countermeasure prevents the broker from silently reusing a consent granted for one downstream client when initiating a request to the AS on behalf of another downstream client, even when the AS cannot distinguish between the broker's downstream clients.
```

  * an implementation change to co-locate the redirection endpoint under the same origin as the endpoint maintaining the user session, and/or to re-authenticate the user at the redirection endpoint from the external user agent (e.g., a browser), or
  * from the current redirection endpoint, performing a further redirection back to the starting origin and/or user agent where the existing session is available. For native apps, the redirect options specified in {{Section 7 of !RFC8252}} MUST be used. The location of this further redirection MUST NOT be controllable by an attacker, or it will result in Open Redirection ({{Section 4.11 of !RFC9700}}).

> ## Shared Consent in Brokered Authorization {#SharedConsent}

Reviewer: The title LGTM. Just an open question: Should we call it "Brokered OAuth" to make it more use case-neutral?

At least OpenID Connect is built on OAuth, but it's not an authorization protocol.
And the Shared Consent problem applies to Brokered Authentication/SSO as well.

That said, as an "OAuth" Security BCP, sticking to the authorization use case also makes sense.

Author: agree, fixed

> In a brokered authorization deployment, an intermediate entity (called the *broker* in the following) mediates between OAuth clients and one or more upstream authorization servers (referred to as *AS* in the following).

Reviewer: I understand that "upstream"/"downstream" are introduced to avoid conflating the Broker-as-a-client with the downstream client, and the Broker-as-an-AS with the upstream AS.
But the question is, how we determine which end is the upstream? Is the AS considered upstream because it is the source of access tokens? This seems intuitive, but not sure whether we need to call this out.

Say MCP has defined upstream/downstream in the opposite direction in https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/tutorials/security/security_best_practices, when referring to the "downstream" APIs/RSs.

Author: Yes, I would call the AS "upstream" because it is the source of tokens, and the client "downstream" because it receives the tokens (no matter if they stem from the brokers or AS and just have been forwarded by the broker). I've tried to clarify it more in f02436f4753fb393eced1d895734baf59d122007.

The broker acts as an authorization server towards each downstream client and, at the same time, acts as a client towards each AS.

When the broker registers itself once at an AS and reuses this single registration for every downstream client it serves, the AS cannot distinguish between those downstream clients.
As a consequence, the consent the user grants for one downstream client is silently reused for any other downstream client that integrates the same broker.
A malicious downstream client integrated with the same broker can therefore obtain access to the user's protected resources without the user ever consenting to that client.

### Attack Description {#SharedConsentDescription}

The descriptions here follow {{research.rub}}, where additional details of the attack are laid out.
Shared consent attacks require at least two downstream clients (one honest, one malicious) to be integrated with the same broker, and that broker to register itself as a single client at the AS.

In the following, let `H-Client` and `M-Client` be downstream clients (honest and attacker-controlled, respectively) integrated with broker `B`.

> The broker `B` registers itself once at the AS and obtains a single client identifier `cid_B@AS` together with a single redirection URI bound to the broker.

Reviewer: > ... with a single redirection URI bound to the broker.

Is the redirection URI relevant to this security issue?

Author: No, I've just added it for completeness as there are two possible options to implement this:
1. The broker only has one callback endpoint for all downstream clients, like broker.com/cb, and instructs all client developers to register this endpoint at the upstream AS.
2. The broker has a dedicated endpoint for each downstream client, like broker.com/cb/client1 and broker.com/cb/client2, and instructs all client developers to register their specific endpoint at the upstream AS.

AFAIK there should be no security issues in either of them (of course implementation flaws excluded), but in (1), the broker has to store the active downstream client of the flow in the state such that at the broker's callback endpoint it can retrieve that information to return control back to the correct downstream client. With a distinct redirect URI there is just one more mechanism besides state that allows the broker to determine the downstream client.

At least if I'm doing protocol compliant OAuth, this should be the way of how it works. That's why I always included the redirect URI besides the client ID, but I'm also open to remove it and make it simpler.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with either way, but a small concern with explicitly saying "single" is that people just skimming over the text might misread this as "you're only vulnerable if your broker uses a single redirect URI" (because "single" puts emphasis on the number).

So maybe we just drop the word "single"?

Author: I agree, removed the word "single" from the attack description.

The broker uses this single registration whenever it issues an authorization request triggered from any of its downstream clients to the AS.

> At `B`, `H-Client` is registered as `cid_HC@B` and `M-Client` is registered as `cid_MC@B`, each with its own redirection URI bound to the respective downstream client.

Reviewer: Are we assuming the "H-Client/M-Client <-> Broker" communication to be compliant with the OAuth standard?
That is, it also has the concept of client_id and redirection URI.
This may not be the case for certain implementations (e.g., Token Vaults where most are non-compliant brokers).

That said, I'm also okay with using standards-compliant OAuth here as a non-normative example.

Author: I think we should use the OAuth-compliant way as the non-normative example as its an IETF draft that should follow the official specs. Nevertheless, I've added a note to the introduction that non-OAuth ways are possible, especially for OAuth as a Service providers and Token Vaults, see 4459e4e8e6e543563315d1a568e7511783fb91cb.

Reviewer: agreed, thanks

From the point of view of the AS, every flow that `B` initiates appears to come from the same client `cid_B@AS`, regardless of which downstream client actually triggered the flow.

The broker acts invisibly to the user during the flow.
It renders no consent screen of its own and no other user-visible UI that would indicate that an additional entity is involved between the downstream client and the AS.

> The broker's origin appears in the user agent's address bar only briefly while the user agent is redirected from the downstream client to the AS, and this transition happens instantly.

Reviewer: I understand what you mean here.

But as we observed, some non-OAuth-compliant brokers may not even redirect through downstream client -> broker origin -> AS via front channel. Instead, the downstream client may fetch the authorization request URL from broker via back channel, and then redirect the UA from downstream client -> AS.

I guess this sentence is meant to be explanatory text only, so we can probably be less prescriptive here regarding "The broker's origin **appears** in the user agent's **address bar**".

Author: I agree. The note on the broker's origin appearing in the user agent's address bar was simply not necessary and didn't add any meaningful information, so I removed it in 68517d2283150915a636cb489121627c7570fe3b.

    |             |          consent: cid_B@AS|                       |
    |<--------------------------------------------------------------->|
    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |         authz res         |                       |
    |             |<--------------------------|                       |
    |             |             |             |                       |
    |             |           authz req: cid_MC@B                     |
    |             |             |------------>|                       |
    |             |             |             |  authz req: cid_B@AS  |
    |             |             |             |---------------------->|
    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |             |  authz res  |                       |
    |             |             |<------------|                       |
~~~

In the second phase of the figure, no consent prompt is rendered for `M-Client`.

> The AS only sees the broker's client identifier `cid_B@AS`, for which the user has already granted consent in the first phase, so the AS silently issues a token to `B` (c.f. `prompt=none` parameter defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of {{OpenID.Core}}) and `B` returns an `authz res` to `M-Client`.

Reviewer: agreed.

> The AS only sees the broker's client identifier `cid_B@AS`, for which the user has already granted consent in the first phase, so the AS silently issues a token to `B` (c.f. `prompt=none` parameter defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of {{OpenID.Core}}) and `B` returns an `authz res` to `M-Client`.

Reviewer: agreed.

> The AS only sees the broker's client identifier `cid_B@AS`, for which the user has already granted consent in the first phase, so the AS silently issues a token to `B` (c.f. `prompt=none` parameter defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of {{OpenID.Core}}) and `B` returns an `authz res` to `M-Client`.

Author: fixed

### Countermeasures {#SharedConsentCountermeasures}

The root cause of shared consent attacks is that the AS cannot tell on whose behalf the broker is acting and therefore cannot ask the user for consent on a per-downstream-client basis.

> Brokers MUST employ at least one of the following two countermeasures.

Reviewer: Caveat: the "downstream client" concept may not have a one-to-one correspondence with the trust boundaries.

- For a 3rd-party broker serving a managed infrastructure for the clients, a federation/tenant of multiple downstream clients may legitimately share the same client registration, or be governed by the same consent screen policy.

- For a 1st-party use case where clients self-manage their broker, it's also fine to use the same client registration/consent policy. Because the clients and the broker are within the same security boundary.

Maybe this is easy to fix by explicitly defining (upfront? or as a side note here in the countermeasure?) what do we mean by a "downstream client". It may not be interpreted strictly as an OAuth client (may not talk in OAuth), and may not be a single application (but instead a federation/tenant of applications).

Author: Clarified this when introducing / defining the term "downstream client" right at the beginning of the section: 4459e4e8e6e543563315d1a568e7511783fb91cb.

#### Per-Client Registration at the Upstream Authorization Server {#SharedConsentRegistration}

Each downstream client MUST be registered as a separate client at the AS.

The broker MUST provide each downstream client with a redirection URI that is hosted by the broker.

> The broker MUST also instruct the downstream client to register at every AS the client expects to use, using the broker-provided redirection URI.

Reviewer: Is the "redirection URI" a direct normative requirement for this security issue (and its defense)?
(Assuming the consent procedure is keyed by client registration (client_id), and that each registered client is further associated with certain attributes, including the redirection URI.)

Author: Also see comment above. The intention here was to describe how brokers can be used in an OAuth-compliant way. But I agree that MUST is maybe not correct here. Maybe change it to MAY? Or make it non-normative? At least, I've not seen any other broker doing this differently. Like Auth0, Okta, Amazon Cognito, etc. are doing this in that way as far as I can remember.

Author: Probably bc1cef686173e14387aac2e9ce89f04901a04fc4 also fixes this issue?

Reviewer: Yes, thanks! 👍

The downstream client is responsible for performing this registration at each AS, obtaining a distinct client identifier (e.g., `cid_HC@AS` for the honest client and `cid_MC@AS` for the malicious client) and any associated credentials (such as a client secret).

> The downstream client MUST hand these credentials over to the broker, which gives the broker full control to act on behalf of the downstream client at the AS.

Reviewer: This is exactly how things work, or should work, for most brokers today.

However, I’m wondering whether we should impose normative keywords like MUST on the detailed procedure. In principle, a broker could also register each downstream client with the AS itself.

I think the crux here is per-client registration, but the specific mechanism for realizing it should be out of scope. Or maybe, we should keep the MUST in the core requirement “Each downstream client MUST be registered as a separate client at the AS”, and present the following lines as a non-normative example ("common practice").

Author: Good catch! I've make this description non-normative, imposing only a MUST on the per downstream client registration at the AS: bc1cef686173e14387aac2e9ce89f04901a04fc4.

    |             |             |             |  authz req: cid_B@AS  |
    |             |             |             |---------------------->|
    |             |             |             |       authz res       |
    |             |             |             |<----------------------|
    |             |             |  authz res  |                       |
    |             |             |<------------|                       |
~~~

#### Discussion of the Countermeasures {#SharedConsentDiscussion}

The two countermeasures have different practical trade-offs.

The Per-Client Registration countermeasure ({{SharedConsentRegistration}}) confronts the user with only one consent screen per OAuth flow, which improves the user experience.
It also leaves the protocol between the downstream client and the broker unconstrained.
The broker may expose a non-OAuth, custom interface to the downstream client and is only required to behave as an OAuth client towards the AS.

The Broker-Side Consent Screen countermeasure ({{SharedConsentBrokerConsent}}) results in two fully OAuth-conformant flows chained one after another (downstream client to broker, broker to AS).

> This is easier for downstream client developers, since they do not need to register their downstream client at every AS the broker integrates with, which can be a substantial effort given that a single broker is typically integrated with many ASes.

Reviewer: I think we should discuss the trade-offs between the two countermeasures independently, without bringing standards compliance into that discussion.

As an example, a broker with a non-OAuth interface to the downstream client can also apply a custom consent screen. This is orthogonal to whether the broker’s interaction with the downstream client uses OAuth.

We can discuss standards compliance earlier, when we first define brokers.

Author: Agree, standards compliance is now removed from the discussion of countermeasures and has moved to the introduction of brokers: 4459e4e8e6e543563315d1a568e7511783fb91cb.

> Both countermeasures are implemented entirely on the client side (the downstream client and the broker) and require no changes to any AS.

Reviewer: Agreed. Is accommodating some new client registrations considered a change to the AS? 
If not, then we could safely claim that the defense "require no changes to any AS." 
If so, we might need to clarify what "changes" we meant.

> Both countermeasures are implemented entirely on the client side (the downstream client and the broker) and require no changes to any AS.

Author: Fixed by clarifying that it requires no **software or protocol changes** to any AS.
